Apart from the position momentum, Heisenberg uncertainty relation, there exists also a time, energy,
uncertainty, relation with Heisenberg's uncertainty relation that the time that a B greater or equal
bar have there is likewise a so-called time energy relation, which.
Reads Delta Times, Delta, the greater equal age half with T. Delta T. being the time interval it takes
to perform a measurement or the time interval a physical phenomenon takes to occur.
For example, an atomic energy transition and Delta being the uncertainty over the energy of the measured
system.
The time energy uncertainty relation tells us something about the shortest, average time Delta T. We
need in order to notice a change in energy of a quantum system by an amount equal to its standard deviation.
Delta or stated more simply, the faster a measurement is performed, the greater the uncertainty on
the energy readout.
This time, energy uncertainty should not come as a surprise, since there is always an uncertainty
over the momentum of a particle.
This also implies an uncertainty over its energy because its momentum and kinetic energy are too directly
related to physical quantities.
And since space, time and energy are the three most important ingredients with which the physical universe
is made of.
It is clear that these two simple little inequality's are expressing something very fundamental about
our physical existence.
Just as in the case of Heisenberg's uncertainty, the time energy uncertainty arises from the wave properties
inherent in the quantum mechanical description of nature as well.
In modern textbooks.
On quantum mechanics, this uncertainty relation, as well as Heisenberg's uncertainty relation, are
usually both derived from operator algebra and statistical considerations.
We do not give these rigorous mathematical proofs here, but let us attempt an intuitive approach that
can illustrate where this relation comes from.
Let us limit ourselves to the case of a photon, a photon of energy, we know from what we discussed
for the Braly hypothesis in the breath diffraction lecture that the photon carries a momentum P equals
E over C.
It's uncertainty over the momentum Delta P due to the uncertainty over the energy.
Delta can therefore be written straightforwardly as Delta P equals Delta over C.
The time that light needs to travel through the space Intervale, Delta X is Delta T equals Delta X
or the C.
From that follows directly that Delta X equals Delta three times C, C, the speed of light, which
in Baku is 300000 kilometers per second per second.
Putting this together, that is making the product of Delta X Times, Delta P one gets Delta three times
Delta T..
But this must be greater or equal age by a half because of Heisenberg's uncertainty relation.
And from which final one gets the time energy revelation, Delta Delta, eight times the 30 greater
equal number of.
To illustrate a bit the physical meaning of the time energy relation, think of a photon, the quantum
uncertainty of a photons energy during a time span, Delta T is Delta greater equal H bar over two times
Delta T..
Or equivalently, we must wait a time Delta T, which must be greater H bar over to Delta to notice
a change of the photons energy by by an amount.
Delta E.
In words, that means that the uncertainty over the energy of a quantum state is inversely proportional
to the time scale during which it occurs or during which we observe it, the shorter measurement is
or the shorter the time during which a quantum event, of course, the larger becomes the possible deviation
from an average energy value we will measure and the more uncertain and fuzzy the energy of the events
we will observe becomes.
So if we desire to obtain an infinitely precise measurement of the energy of, say, a particle, we
would have to wait an infinitely long time to obtain the result of the measurement.
And it can't be emphasized enough that this is not due to an inaccuracy of our measurements, but rather
it is an intrinsic property of nature from the practical point of view, even in principle and with
the most ideal and infinitely precise measurement device, we will always be bounded by this natural
and intrinsic uncertainty of the single outcome at every measurement.
Or to see it from another perspective, one needs much more time to prepare a system in a sharp, sharply
defined energy state than one with less determined one.
However, for the single photon, that does not mean that one never will measure its energy with less
uncertainty.
It is all about a statistical fluke fluctuation, an average uncertainty one should expect independent
of the perfection and precision level of the measurement apparatus.
To clarify this important conceptual aspect, let us take a step further and be more precise.
First of all, the same Delta refers to the statistical standard deviation.
We already saw how this is the statistical fluctuation of a set of measured values around some average
value, with the latter being the expectation value we discussed in the lecture on the state vector
observables and the Schrodinger equation.
In the case of interest here, it tells us how large that the energy standard deviation Delta is as
a departure from an average energy.
E ba obtained ideally after an infinite number of measurements, once you have measured a sufficient
number of Even's, you should obtain the typical bell shaped exponential probability probability density
function that is the so-called normal distribution or Gaussian probability density function, which
tells us how the energy fluctuations around a mean energy are distributed.
Here we have on the accessor the energy and on the ordinate axis, the number of obtained measurements
corresponding to some energy e I with some ends and measured.
Energy value, as a rule of thumb, the probability to find an energy measurement inside the standard
deviation delta around a mean value bar is about 68 percent as shown with a blind area under the Gaussian
function.
This means that we can observe even with more uncertainty than Delta, but with less probability.
Now, the similarity between Heisenberg's uncertainty principle and the time energy uncertainty should
not mislead us.
Because as we have seen in quantum mechanics, operators can represent the position and momentum as
their complementarity can be expressed by noncommitted commuting operators, we have seen that the energy
of a system can also be represented by an observable an operator which acts on the wave function and
which expresses the Schrodinger equation that is namely the the Hamiltonian operator.
However, there is no time operator in quantum mechanics and therefore there is also no commuting relation
between time and energy.
In quantum mechanics.
Time appears only as a parameter in the equations, just a number.
It turns out that the time is not an observable because it is not something we can measure.
This might sound strange at first.
After all, in our vernacular, we speak of clocks as measuring time.
But if you think about it, you realize that clocks measure a change in a physical system and indicate
it by an arrow or digital display.
Time is something too subjective and indefinable, an entity for anyone to ever really measure in the
sense that you can measure the position of a particle or the length of a table.
This is because time is not something inherently possessed by an object, as are its length mass position,
energy or charge, electric charge.
It is something we use our posteriorly as a measure of change of these inherent properties, but it
is not a property of objects themselves.
The quantum world reminds us of this.
There is no such such thing as time as a time operator.
There is no time out there that you can see and touch light.
You can see and touch a table.
Time is just a parameter in our physical series.
Just a number that is a scholar quantity.
One can compare this with the space time notion of relativity here, time and space are on equal footing.
Physicists even use time as a fourth dimension, together with the three spatial dimensions where whereas
in quantum mechanics, time appears as very different, separate entity from space.
So there is something mysterious in this discrepancy that is debated even nowadays among philosophers
and physicists.
It is also one of the stumbling blocks for modern physicists who are trying to unify quantum theory
with general relativity into a unique, uh, unified field theory.
One reason for why this turns out to be so difficult is that no one knows how to build a theory that
brings under the same umbrella such diverse conceptions and expressions of space and time and time as
we find it in general relativity and quantum mechanics.
So let us consider an example whether quantum time energy uncertainty plays an important role, an instance
where this, of course, is that of the atomic energy transitions, we can take as an example that of
the the hydrogen atom photon emission here.
The transition, of course, very quickly over time of Delta to smaller than the tenth power of a second,
less than a tenth of a billionth of a second.
This means that according to the time, energy and certain relation, every time an atom emits photon,
it will not always possess the same energy as the previous one.
Even if for each single individual photon, one measure is a definite energy, the subsequent measurement
of several other photons will give a slightly different, different energy for each with a random distribution
center centered on the mean that is with Eber plus minus Delta Ibar being the average atonce energy
and Delta its standard deviation.
And Delta itself, given by Delta Greater Equal Age Bar over two times Delta T.
You might even detect photons with an even greater energy deviations than Delta, but the probability
that this will occur decreases quickly.
That is exponentially according to a normal distribution caution law.
This implies that the lines of atomic spectra are always a bit of an energy and interval in conventional
spectrographs, the lines are just the projection on a screen of Haslet through which the light source
shines through.
For instance, see the hydrogen and mercury spectral emission lines we showed in the black body radiation
lecture.
There will be two causes of the line thickness.
The first cause you should already know it is the refraction effects of the slits or equivalently due
to the Heisenberg's uncertainty.
The second cause which adds up to the previous one is the atomic level energy uncertainty.
I leave it to you as a homework to show that for a pure light, pure yellow light source, say, coming
from a laser of every average wavelength of 600 nanometers, nanometer is equal ten to the power minus
nine meter a billionth of a meter, with Delta to equal ten to the minus 10 seconds transition time.
The time energy relation leads to an uncertainty of about ten to the minus three nanometers.
That is, as thousands of a nanometer.
This is also a tiny departure from the mean wavelength of the source and is negligible for most applications.
But in some applications it which require high precision.
This effect must be taken into account.
To sum up, time and energy are intimately related in quantum mechanics in such a way that it makes
no sense to speak about precise and definite energy values, everything depends on the timescale we
are considering.
If a quantum event occurs on very short timescales, for example, nuclear and nuclear decays occur
at the order of ten to the power minus 25 seconds.
So extremely short and then its energy will inevitably be undetermined, fuzzy and smeared out over
an interval of energy values.
Again, we see that it makes no sense to speak about objects as having an objective, definite, precise
physical quantity of property such as here the energy at a specific instant of time, no more, no less
than it makes sense in quantum mechanics to speak of things behaving or possessing both a precise position
and momentum.
Objectivity has become here a very questionable thing.
The question that should arise naturally at this point is where do these fluctuations, so to speak,
come from?
And even are there really things in the quantum world as fluctuations?
Are they really fluctuating out there?
Where does that extra or missing energy content delta come into play or go to if the universal law of
energy conservation is supposed to hold?
Is is it energy that pops into existence from out of nothing?
We will try to answer these questions in the coming section on zero point vacuum energy, but virtual
particles and the Casimir effect before that.
However, let us take a look at another strange effect related to the time, energy, uncertainty,
namely the tunnel effect.